docs/machine_learning/interview_questions.md, before:


- One of the most obvious reason for failing an interview is not knowing the answer to the questions. While there are other factors at play, like how confident you sound, your behavior, attitude and even the mood of the interviewer, knowledge of the Data science field is well within the scope of this book - hence something I can help you with. So here are some questions to make you ready for your upcoming interview.  

!!! Question ""
    === "Question"
        #### What is the different between Standardization and Normalization?

    === "Answer"

        Normalization is the process of scaling the data to a common scale. It is also known as Min-Max Scaling where the final range could be [0, 1] or [-1,1] or something else. $X_{new} = (X - X_{min})/(X_{max} - X_{min})$ Standardization is the process of scaling the data to have zero mean and unit variance. $X_{new} = (X - mean)/Std$

!!! Question ""
    === "Question"
        #### Is it possible that during ML training, both validation (or test) loss and accuracy, are increasing?

    === "Answer"

        Accuracy and loss are not necessarily exactly (inversely) correlated, as loss measures a difference between raw prediction (float) and class (0 or 1), while accuracy measures the difference between thresholded prediction (0 or 1) and class. So if raw predictions change, loss changes but accuracy is more "resilient" as predictions need to go over/under a threshold to actually change accuracy. [Soltius's answer on SE](https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/282160/how-is-it-possible-that-validation-loss-is-increasing-while-validation-accuracy)


!!! Question ""
    === "Question"
        #### Is K-means clustering algorithm guaranteed to converge with unique result?

    === "Answer"

        K-means clustering algorithm is guaranteed to converge but the final result may vary based on the centroid initialisation. This is why it is suggested to try multiple initialization strategies and pick the one with best clustering. The convergence is guaranteed as the sum of squared distances between each point and its centroid strictly decreases over each iteration. Also the practical run time of k-means is basically linear. Refer [Visualizing K Means Clustering - Naftali Harris](https://www.naftaliharris.com/blog/visualizing-k-means-clustering/)

!!! Question ""
    === "Question"
        #### In K-means clustering, is it possible that a centroid has no data points assigned to it?

    === "Answer"

        Yes it is possible, imagine a centroid placed in middle of ring of other centroids. Several implementations either removes that centroid or random;y replace it somewhere else in the data space. Refer [Visualizing K Means Clustering - Naftali Harris](https://www.naftaliharris.com/blog/visualizing-k-means-clustering/)

Commit message:

terms pages replaced with interview; more mods

docs/machine_learning/interview_questions.md, after:


- Here are some questions and their answers to make you ready for your next interview. Best of luck :wave:

!!! Question ""
    === "Question"
        #### What is the different between Standardization and Normalization?

    === "Answer"

        Normalization is the process of scaling the data to a common scale. It is also known as Min-Max Scaling where the final range could be [0, 1] or [-1,1] or something else. $X_{new} = (X - X_{min})/(X_{max} - X_{min})$ Standardization is the process of scaling the data to have zero mean and unit variance. $X_{new} = (X - mean)/Std$

!!! Question ""
    === "Question"
        #### Is it possible that during ML training, both validation (or test) loss and accuracy, are increasing?

    === "Answer"

        Accuracy and loss are not necessarily exactly (inversely) correlated, as loss measures a difference between raw prediction (float) and class (0 or 1), while accuracy measures the difference between thresholded prediction (0 or 1) and class. So if raw predictions change, loss changes but accuracy is more "resilient" as predictions need to go over/under a threshold to actually change accuracy. [Soltius's answer on SE](https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/282160/how-is-it-possible-that-validation-loss-is-increasing-while-validation-accuracy)


!!! Question ""
    === "Question"
        #### Is K-means clustering algorithm guaranteed to converge with unique result?

    === "Answer"

        K-means clustering algorithm is guaranteed to converge but the final result may vary based on the centroid initialisation. This is why it is suggested to try multiple initialization strategies and pick the one with best clustering. The convergence is guaranteed as the sum of squared distances between each point and its centroid strictly decreases over each iteration. Also the practical run time of k-means is basically linear. Refer [Visualizing K Means Clustering - Naftali Harris](https://www.naftaliharris.com/blog/visualizing-k-means-clustering/)

!!! Question ""
    === "Question"
        #### In K-means clustering, is it possible that a centroid has no data points assigned to it?

    === "Answer"

        Yes it is possible, imagine a centroid placed in middle of ring of other centroids. Several implementations either removes that centroid or random;y replace it somewhere else in the data space. Refer [Visualizing K Means Clustering - Naftali Harris](https://www.naftaliharris.com/blog/visualizing-k-means-clustering/)
